immigration, civilizational battles,
arguments about Israel, race, racism.
[music] This is this is sort of the zone
of debate and abortion doesn't seem
central.
>> I mean, I I would have a slightly
different view for better and for worse,
and [music] that so I do think there's
an identity crisis happening in the
right. I agree with you on that.
[music]
>> Today, I'm excited to bring you
something a little bit different. Last
month, I spoke with the pro-life
activist Laya Rose [music] in front of a
live audience at the Catholic University
of America. We were there [music] to
talk about the future of the pro-life
movement and the students in attendance
[music] had a lot of questions.
>> So my question for you, my question has
to do with the collapse of
>> I [music] wanted to ask about IVF and
specifically how we should go about
resolving.
>> The fundamental question is when does
life begin?
>> I wanted to ask about I guess the future
of the pro-life movement and I had
questions too. Was the pro-life movement
really prepared for the end of Roie
Wade? Is Donald Trump actually a
pro-life president? And [music] where
does the anti-abortion movement go from
here? For answers to those and many more
questions, here's my interview with Laya
Rose.
[music]
Laya Rose, welcome to this stage at
Catholic University and welcome to
Interesting Times.
>> Thank you so much. I'm thrilled to be
here both for a Catholic university and
the interesting times that we're in.
>> That's right. And we're here to discuss
the politics of abortion,
>> the position of the pro-life movement a
few years after Roie Wade was
overturned. Um, I want to know what you
think the pro-life future looks like uh
here in the second Trump administration.
But since this is a podcast, I'm going
to start by asking you a little bit
about your own biography. So, you're the
founder of Live Action, a pro-life
organization, and you founded it when
you were 15 years old,
>> correct?
>> So, what was Live Action at the
beginning when you didn't have your
driver's license yet? Well, because I
didn't have my driver's license, it was
a group of other 15year-olds, maybe some
16-year-olds in my parents living room,
uh, fellow students, and we were
determined to just make a difference of
some kind about abortion because I
became very convicted that this was the
human rights issue of our day. And I had
found this book in my parents' home
which had basically the history since
Roi Wade and before that of abortion in
America. It had images of fetal
development and it also had images of
abortion victims and I was just very uh
compelled that I needed to do something
about the issue because I had never
heard it talked about in my church
growing up. I was raised evangelical. I
rarely heard it talked about anywhere
else. My parents were pro-life, but they
were not activists.
>> Where did Where did you grow up?
>> San Jose, California.
>> Okay.
>> So, early Silicon Valley days. My dad
was in software programming, and we were
very much just, you know, in some ways a
normal family. In other ways, not. I'm
one of eight kids. So, we were pro-life.
They were living the pro-life conviction
very beautifully by having so many kids.
But all that to say, I thought, okay,
there's 3,000 abortions a day. This has
been legal since before I was born. I
find out there's a Planned Parenthood
abortion clinic committing abortions up
to 24 weeks within 10 miles of where I
grew up and no one seemed to say or do
anything about it. And so I said, I want
to do something. I was interested in a
lot of other causes. I was a normal kid
otherwise doing trying to get through
high school, but I thought I got to do
something. And that was the origin of
live action.
>> So I think the point at which you came
to national prominence was a little bit
later when you were in college, right?
And um you became famous for basically
going undercover at Planned Parenthood.
Um what were you doing in that in those
days?
>> Well, freshman at UCLA and I was
inspired to do more pro-life activism.
Started live action UCLA and so Planned
Parenthood was at the time especially
seen as this great organization serving
women's healthc care. People didn't
really understand it's the biggest
abortion chain. they're providing
abortions which end human lives. And so
that inspired me to say, I want to I
want to expose this. I want to get
people talking about this. Started to
started a magazine on campus. Started
doing investigative reporting as best I
knew how. And then I ended up going
undercover into Los Angeles Planned
Parenthood facilities to expose the
connection between underage girls who
are pregnant and abusers. Because
unfortunately, I'd been doing all this
research. I saw this horrible pattern of
these court cases where girls would sue
Planned Parenthood or name them in their
lawsuits for the sexual abuse cover up
that they endured at abortion clinics
because they were taken by their abusers
when they were pregnant and instead of
reporting it, there's mandatory
reporting laws for sexual abuse. The
Planned Parenthood would cover up the
abuse and then they would send the girl
home back to the abuser. She'd come back
for a repeat abortion. Horrible cycles
continued. I started compiling the
footage of them covering up the abuse
thing. They wouldn't report it and
they'd get me his secret abortion.
>> How old How old were you at that point?
You were 18.
>> It wasn't hard to be 15.
>> That was That wasn't It was easy back
then.
>> And you would tell them Yes.
>> a backstory basically.
>> Yes. Exactly. And then when we started
to report that uh it took up a life of
its own, mostly through YouTube, some
independent media, some of the more
mainstream media started to cover it
when Planned Parenthood threatened to
sue me at the time for the investigative
reporting. As time went on, I started
doing investigative reporting across the
country. We launched live action news.
And since then, we've been reporting now
for the last almost two decades.
>> Let's go from there to a kind of I mean,
we can call it pro-life 101. I'm going
to ask you some very some very simple
questions. Now, um why is abortion
wrong?
>> So, I I would say abortion's wrong. You
can do a very simple logical syllogism.
Uh, first, it's always wrong to
intentionally take an innocent human
life. And I found that most people agree
with that. Virtually everyone I speak to
agrees with that. It's always wrong to
intentionally take an innocent human
life. Abortion intentionally takes an
innocent human life. And so then the
conclusion of those premises is
therefore abortion is always wrong. Now,
some people of course are going to take
issue with that second sentence, that
second premise. You can argue their
potential. You can say that well they're
not the same value as born life.
Certainly they have potential but it is
undeniable scientifically that they are
alive and they are human. They are human
life. You wouldn't have to have an
abortion to end the pregnancy if they
were not a human life. And so that is
why in the product movement we oppose
the murder. We consider it the murder of
pre-born children for the same reasons
we oppose the murder of those those that
are born. And what would you argue to
someone who listens to that and says,
"Well, surely there's some kind of
ambiguous ground in there, someone who
says,"Look, I I can accept that abortion
kills an organism that is a member of
the species, homo sapiens, and I can
even accept that that might be wrong,
but I don't think that that rises to the
level of what we think about when we
think about homicide, murder, and so
on." Um and I think usually when people
make this argument if they push it
through they end up saying something
like um you know there is some feature
of humanity um awareness consciousness
you know brain development and so on
that is just not there in the tiniest
embryos um I think there's a lot of
people who have a hard time seeing the
tiniest embryos as the equivalent of an
infant or an adult human being and so
on. Um, so what what is the what's your
response to that sort of quest for a
kind of wrong but not murder perspective
on the subject?
>> Yes. And of course we get that all the
time. That's the common objection. It's
just not the same. It's just not the
same. They're different. It's different.
The the entity when they're unborn for
all of these reasons are different. And
I think you can categorize all of those
reasons under the acronym SLED. And SLED
stands for size, level of development,
environment, and degree of dependency.
And these are the only four
distinguishing factors between a
pre-born child or pre-born life and a
born life. So of course size is
difference. You already referenced that
the embryo is clearly smaller than a
born child. A born child, a newborn
child is clearly smaller than a toddler
who's clearly smaller than you are or I
am. I'm smaller than you. Um our size
[laughter] shorter. I'm shorter. Our
size does not our size does not
determine our value as human lives and
it certainly [clears throat] doesn't
should not determine our legal status.
Right? Um so there's size then there is
level of development. Um it is clear
that an embryo is less developed than in
a fetus and a fetus is less developed
than a newborn, a newborn than a
toddler, then an adolescent than an
adult etc. But your level of development
as a human life, we all begin life as a
single cell embryo. We'll end life
hopefully at, you know, in our gray old
glory years when we die peacefully in
our beds. That's what we hope, right?
But
>> I intend [laughter] to die at the
podcast, Mike. But but
>> Oh, no. That sounds quite dramatic.
>> No, I'm joking. [laughter]
Yeah.
>> Um but but our our level of development
also does not determine or negate our
humanity. We are humans that are
developing. And if you again tie legal
status or legal rights, human rights,
basic human rights like life, the right
to not be killed to our level of
development, then it's I would say it's
an an elitist society where the strong
get to, you know, have tyranny over the
weak. Then there's environment. Clearly,
the child in the womb is in the womb,
not outside the womb. A lot of people
say, well, birth is personhood. You're
suddenly life outside of the womb. You
have legal status. But your environment
in any other context wouldn't determine
your humanity because you're born in a
different country, born to a different
family. you're in a different location.
That doesn't change your humanity. And
then finally, your degree of dependency.
It is clear, and this is the big one,
right? Bodily autonomy. They're totally
dependent on the mother. Therefore, the
mother should have the power to end the
life of her child in the womb, but only
in the womb, not a newborn. We are all
dependent in one way or another. You are
dependent. Myself, we're dependent on
people who we can get food from, right?
And otherwise, if we can get our food,
we would we would die. A newborn is
certainly dependent on his or her
parents. And those parents have to use
their bodies to care for that newborn or
the surrogate adult that trans they
transfer care to. And an unborn child is
totally dependent, completely dependent
on his or her mother. But that doesn't
change his or her humanity. In fact, I
would argue that proves the humanity
because that's how we all start life.
That is the nature of a human being to
be interdependent and to start life
totally dependent and often to end life
totally dependent. So when you look at
the acronym of sled, you can see none of
these differentiators between an unborn
human and a born human uh mean that
there should be less value assigned or a
differing legal status. Both are human
and both deserve fundamental human
rights.
>> I've always thought that the dependence
question has ended up being I think
where a lot of the legal and political
arguments have rested, right? because it
is connected to the idea that um it is
you know in effect illegitimate for the
government to ask women to sort of carry
the unique burden of having this life
that is so dependent on them is
literally inside them is you know you've
had three children you're you're aware
of the substantial burden that pregnancy
involves I do think the level of
development argument is the place where
Um there is there is a kind of intuition
that people have that until you have
consciousness
you have not sort of passed some kind of
threshold into humanity. And obviously a
problem there is no one knows exactly
when consciousness begins and so on. But
someone sitting here arguing with you
could say, "I think you I think you know
the S, the E, and the D, fine. They make
a good case against second trimester or
third trimester abortion. But are you
really telling me that, you know, the 28
cell organism that clearly doesn't seem
conscious at all has attained a status
where you have to grant it full legal
rights?" Well, and I I would say listen
to to to judge the single cell embryo as
somehow not up to par because they're
not at 20 weeks yet or 24 weeks or
whatever you put your arbitrary marker
for consciousness. I don't think there's
any good argument for that. Of course,
consciousness is very special about
humans that we eventually develop it,
but humans can go in and out of
consciousness. Humans have can have
varying degrees of consciousness. A
newborn clearly has far less
consciousness than just you know a year
later and certainly than an adult. So I
would argue that's a very arbitrary
standard. First of all you can't you
know again put a line in the gational
you know time of pregnancy and say this
is exactly when it happened. So it's
also very dangerous to say well that's
going to be my line for telling someone
they have legal value or not because you
don't know when it is exactly. So I just
I don't buy that argument. I don't find
it compelling. I understand people want
a line in the sand that they can draw to
say some abortion is okay. And I think
the question we should ask why do we
want that so badly, right?
>> And that I think is the interesting
discussion. Why is America so hooked on
abortion? And but a lot of people would
say that if people want it, they want it
because they associate legal abortion
with, you know, what what gets described
as reproduct, right, the language of
reproductive rights, reproductive
freedom, but which is fundamentally
about female equality in what was
historically a male-dominated society.
Roie Wade is decided um at a sort of
during a particular surge of feminism
and female advancement in American
society. I think it's very hard for a
lot of people to imagine a world where
abortion is restricted as it was in
1955,
but you have the landscape of female
achievement and opportunity that you
have in the 2020s. Do you think there's
a tension there?
>> I mean, I think that the tension is an
unnecessary one. I think we've walked
ourselves into a brick wall and we
didn't need to do it. The the the
mistake of feminism and not first wave.
I think first wave was beautiful, but
then as we went further down the waves
with feminism, the mistake was to say,
well, now I need to be the same as men.
Not just have equal status under the
law, but now I need to be the same. And
so if a man can't get pregnant, then I
shouldn't have to get pregnant. So then
if we have sex and he's not pregnant,
and then I get pregnant, then I should
be able to disappear the pregnancy.
That's not reality. The reality is men
and women are different. And the reality
is when you get pregnant, you're
pregnant with a new human life that also
has rights and bodily autonomy and a
whole lifetime of choices in front of
them. And so when we protect, we play
the game of unreality that men and women
are the same and should always be
treated the same bodily in terms of what
they can do with their bodies or
reproductive systems is just a mistake.
And that's why one of the reasons why,
of course, we have 1 million abortions a
year now because we're we're not living
in reality. I would argue what's truly
pro-women and certainly gonna make for a
more just and loving society is to
acknowledge the differences between men
and women and acknowledge what sex does
because I think this is the root of the
issue we see sex today and this was the
sexual revolution right on steroids the
free love movement sex should be
divorced at all times for adult pleasure
as long as there's consent whatever that
means it should be divorced from
consequences responsibility and
certainly procreation and that's not
reality either because Sex creates new
life and sex is incredibly bonding and
sex is also I think sacred and belongs
in lifelong commitment which is why
historically we've valued sex in
marriage as something really special
where it belongs and that's what I would
say is as a tragic mistake we've made
and that's why people now have this view
of sex of as recreational and it's less
they they've lowered the bar for its
value and then the next step is you say
human life isn't valuable and I This was
a a huge error that feminism when it
started to get married to the free love
movement, the sexual revolution
movements, it wasn't always like that,
but when they started to get married,
those movements, um it became very toxic
for both women and now certainly for
children.
>> We live on the far side of the sexual
revolution, right? Um, and I think any
plausible world where abortion is
restricted is not going to be a world
where you have an immediate return to
large-scale premarital chastity. And so
it is most likely going to be a world
where you have a lot of pregnancies in
difficult circumstances that under
current conditions would end in
abortion. Um, you're talking about
reality.
A core reality is that of difference
between men and women is that in a
situation where there's an unplanned or
unexpected pregnancy, women do bear a
burden that men don't bear. What is the
responsibility of society, government,
public policy to be cognizant of that
and provide some kind of special
support? Is that is that an obligation?
Is there inherent in the pro-life
argument is there a case for a kind of
public provision of support for women
who are being asked to carry
pregnancies?
>> I would say absolutely yes. And I think
you know part of live actions advocacy
is certainly we want to abolish
abortion. We don't legal abortion is is
is at its core unjust and it should not
be permitted. U abortion should not be
permitted. I do think the government
should provide there should be safety
nets for people that find themselves in
tough situations to support children.
And I also think there should be public
policy to encourage marriage because I I
I'm not so I guess pessimistic about the
future and when it comes to
>> I'm talking about just the short term
future. You pass [laughter]
you pass an anti-abortion law in the
District of Columbia or the state of
California tomorrow and
>> in the next two years what you know what
does the landscape look like?
>> We know in states like Texas that have
banned abortion because there were about
12 states where the laws kicked in after
Dobs v. Jackson where they were able to
ban most or virtually all abortions and
you saw tens of thousands of lives
saved. And so there are lives that are
being saved because of pro-life laws and
people who choose not to abort. I mean
there was a feature piece on a young
woman who was in Texas right after Dobby
Jackson and couldn't get the abortion
because it was illegal now. So she had
twins and they painted the picture as a
very dire one and it was like wait she
had these beautiful twins. You know they
have their whole life in front of them.
So that we could celebrate that. But the
point is pro-life laws absolutely do
prevent abortions. And I think, you
know, if there is abortion provided as
effectively backup contraception, that's
how it's used today. And I think we
should be very realistic about that. 50%
of women who have abortions are using
contraception when they get pregnant,
the month that they get pregnant. And
the idea that contraception is going to,
you know, save lives ultimately somehow
because it's going to prevent abortions.
No, it's it's created this mindset that
again sex is not for marriage and
ultimately to be open to life. can be
for pleasure and you can just use
abortion as a backup contraception. You
can change the mindset and and we've
seen this after dos. We saw huge social
media campaigns for people saying, you
know, now we're going to be absinent
because we can't basically use abortion
as backup contraception. I mean, that's
what it was. They didn't say that, you
know, the quiet part out loud, but
that's what it was.
>> So, I do think
>> sometimes they said they wouldn't date a
Republican like that that that line may
have also, and I took that personally.
No. Um, sorry. That's um, we're So, I'm
I'm trying to basically sketch out what
you might call a kind of ideal
pro-life vision before we descend to the
realities of politics right now. So,
just the last question on that is what
what kind of in an ideal world, right?
Um, what kind of exceptions around
abortion are permissible from your point
of view from a pro-life perspective, if
any? So I when we're talking about
direct and intentional taking of an
innocent life, there's no exception.
That can be just. And this is highly
controversial for some because we've
been trained to think that abortion is
somehow medically necessary. And I'm not
talking about the removal of an ectopic
pregnancy. In that case, the child's
growing in a hostile environment. They
are the intention is not to take their
life. You have to remove the child
anyways. It's not going to be able to
survive there. The mother's life is
threatened. I'm also [snorts] not
talking about miscarriage care where the
baby's heart has already stopped
beating. Removing that baby during a
procedure is not in the direct and
intentional taking of a life. But in any
other case, if there's a medical
scenario where there is some sort of
emergency situation, the mother is uh
having a health crisis, there's a whole
world of medicine to support and care
for both mother and baby and to advocate
for both of those lives in a clinical
setting and in very rare cases in a
life-threatening emergency. an early
delivery may be necessary of that baby.
But in that case, you do everything you
can to save again both lives. So it
changes entirely the posture of our
medical system, which today is basically
saying, well, life is disposable. Have
the abortion because it's easier. Have
the abortion because the baby's
disabled. Have the abortion because you
may have this health complication. I
mean, I have a sibling, beautiful
family, my brother who's married, uh,
beautiful kids. one of his children is
missing part of his hand because an
amniotic band issue in the womb.
Immediately recommendations to abort
were made to him and his wife at 20
weeks. It's happened to many other
friends of mine. People listening
probably have had those recommendations
in their lives. The medical system right
now is not designed to care for both as
patients. It's designed to treat
abortion as somehow a necessity or a
go-to. And I think we need to care for
them both. So, in no case should
abortion be permissible under law.
>> Okay. I'm going to come back to that
issue because I think a lot of very
fraught political debates revolve around
it. Yes.
>> Um but first let's talk about sort of
the bigger realities. Row was overturned
in 2022 in the DOS decision. The issue
has currently returned fully to the
states. Pro-life laws were on the books
in a number of states. But just to give
my own summary of where things stand and
you can you can react to this. I think
the pro-life movement has been maybe
more successful in some ways than I
expected in defending some of those
existing pro-life laws, mostly in red
and conservative states. And it was also
successful in basically averting defeat
in 2024 when the Democratic Party was
campaigning very straightforwardly on a
promise to restore abortion rights and
there was a sense that you know the
election could be a referendum on
abortion but in the end um Donald Trump
was elected president. So those are in a
sense pro-life victories. At the same
time, when the abortion issue has come
up for a referendum, including in
Republican leaning states, the pro-life
movement has lost. Um, there have been,
I'd say, at best peacemeal attempts to
pass kind of pro- family or mother
supporting legislation of the kind you
were suggesting that you support. Trump
himself has very conspicuously kept the
pro-life movement at arms length, has
accepted a system where abortion pills
are available by mail across the country
and into the bargain overall and this
started before DOBS, but the abortion
rate has risen in America as a whole.
So, you can react to that analysis or
just tell me was the pro-life movement
prepared for the fall of Row?
>> That's a very good question. I think in
some ways we were prepared and in other
ways we were not. So you could say, well
then you weren't prepared. A lack of
preparedness in any area is a lack of
preparedness. And what does that mean
concretely? I I would say
it's one thing to
break an institution inst
institutionalization of abortion over
five decades which is what happened
after row government got caught up in
funding the biggest abortion chain which
is planned parenthood in w with
ultimately hundreds of millions of
dollars then you have the academia
largely becomes very pro-abortion you
have media becoming very proabortion you
know the New York Times editorial board
supports abortion abion and most
editorial boards do. You have, you know,
entertainment media supporting abortion.
So, you have this really uh I would say
a monolith throughout these different
industries, parts of society that just
support abortion. It's kind of the
given. And if you're, you know,
pro-women, if you're feminist, then you
have to support abortion. I mean, that's
that was another message that I think a
lot of women in my generation,
millennial women were sent. That's not
true, by the way. The early feminists
were pro-life. But all of that was the
messaging. And so when you get this blow
to Roie Wade, they didn't assert
personhood of the child, right? So they
said, well, the states get to decide
this, which was a step of progress, but
I don't think it was full justice. So
>> do you think do you think the Supreme
Court should have ruled that the unborn
have a right to life under the 14th
Amendment?
>> Absolutely. Yes. And I think the 14th
Amendment is very clear that everyone
should be given equal protection of our
laws and no state shall have the right
to deprive anyone of life and equal
protection of the law. And that's not
happening with the unborn children that
are not being treated as human human
beings and persons. So I think they
didn't go far enough. But all that to
say there was a major backlash. We have
to be real about that. There were
referendums. There were I mean in
California they passed Proposition 1 and
what happened was we basically enshrined
abortion yet again. I mean it wasn't
enshrined to the state degree that it
was but we enshrined abortion in our
state constitution. Now I'm in a very
blue state. Got you know Gavin Newsome
now Kla Harris obviously um from
California. It's it's very like
far-left. That's the that's the ideology
there. But the pro-life movement has
always been a volunteer movement. It it
is different from virtually every other
movement because the victims are all
voiceless and have no votes and they're,
you know, unborn. So people who are
fighting for life, prolifers, you know,
they're they're called all kind of names
or, you know, in media they can be kind
of disparaged or put up in caricatures,
but the reality is there a lot of just
good normal people who themselves are
not getting anything from this cause.
They're not advocating for their own
rights. They're advocating for basically
other people's children's rights. And
the amount of money that the sheer
amount of money that the prolife
movement has been outspent by when you
consider Planned Parenthood as a
lobbying organization when you consider
the money of the Democratic party that
threw it behind proabortion ads in
midterms after docu Jackson and then
some of these ballot initiatives to push
abortion on demand as part of the state
constitutions in some of these states.
The prolife movement was outspent
sometimes 10 to1 sometimes 30 to1 and
the prolife movement didn't have the
infrastructure that the democratic party
has built for abortion or that planned
parenthood quite frankly has built in
their lobbying groups. Now is that our
fault? Yes. You know Live Action, one of
the projects of Live Action is working
to solve that. But the point is it's a
it's a David and Goliath type fight.
>> Okay. But that's that's a fairly
pessimistic narrative though. What do
you just sort of
>> David won? David won. He wins. Um, yes.
Yes, that's fair.
>> Um, but what advice then do you give
David in this? What is what is the sling
and the stone if we're going to extend
if we're going to extend the metaphor?
And what I mean, apart from saying, you
know, okay, you need better grassroots
organizing, you need better fundraising
and so on. What is the actual
>> political strategy? Like you're you're
here in DC. Um, you know, the March for
Life just happened. There's been a lot
of argument among prolifers about what
the Trump administration is or isn't
doing. Um what is your view of how the
Trump administration has handled the
abortion issue?
>> Yes. Um I think there's some absolute
wins and then there's some
yettobe won objectives. I'll put it that
way. And and what I mean by that is, you
know, there's things that I think should
be happening that haven't happened yet.
and the abortion pill should not be on
the market. And that's one of the things
that I'm here in DC to talk about. We
did a press conference [laughter]
yesterday um on Capitol Hill. We had a
meeting with Secretary Kennedy. Um we,
you know, have been had meetings with
the administration urging that this be
done. And you know, again, it's highly
>> political. What do you What do you think
without like betraying private
confidences, just as a pundit, let's
say, God help you, what do you think is
the big impediment?
>> I [snorts] mean, the big impediment is
that this is the most prevalent kind of
abortion today. 600,000 lives were lost
by the abortion pill in the last
reported year. And women are being told
that this is like a period pill. There's
literally a website that's called period
pills basically saying you don't even
have to know if you're having an
abortion if you just want your period to
come more quickly take meristone.
There's so many issues with that, right?
It's misleading. There's no informed
consent. I mean, there's so many issues
with that, but
>> but the political problem is if you took
this step, it would be seen as a very
big national pro-life step and the
administration thinks that would be
unpopular.
>> But this just shows Yes. And I think but
but this just shows the someone some in
the administration. I don't think again
there's there's so much nuance here, but
but I do think that
>> this is one of the big lies, right? I
mean, the the the pro-choice movement
originally was supposed to be for women.
That was the idea. Give women choices,
right? What it has become politically is
a very extremist movement that only is
supported by a small number of
Americans. It's not a majority in terms
of that public policy that they're
promoting. abortion on demand without
apology, no religious exemptions,
taxpayer funded, right? And so it's been
so politicized is what I'm saying.
>> But so but but again in terms of the
political problem, yes, there is a
version of the pro-choice position um
that is sort of sweeping comprehensive
and only held by a minority of the
country. But the view that abortion
should be available in some form is a
popular position.
>> Yes, we're we're hooked on it right now
culturally and that's one of the the
polit the political fight. I know we're
we're we're talking about that. It's so
important, but my our biggest focus at
Life Action, actually, my personal focus
with other projects I'm working on is
changing really the environment that
we're in through really one person at a
time because it does take people having
their own haha moments about
relationships and sex and purpose and
identity because I think there's a
spiritual sickness and a moral decay
that we're experiencing and that's that
is the biggest thing to fight. So that's
>> just just to preview the goals of this
conversation. I want to end with that
question of persuasion and one so
one-on-one, but I want to stay with the
political for the moment because that is
persuasion is by definition a long-term
project. Maybe not a 50-year project,
but at least a long-term project. In the
meantime, the pro-life movement needs a
way to make political progress slash
defend the territory that it has slash
speak to people who are deeply
conflicted on the issue. Um, and is
there is there a zone of incrementalism
and compromise that you're comfortable
with in that area? Well, I would say the
administration has already proven time
and time again that they're willing to
go out and do highly controversial
things
>> because they also have a rather low
approval rating at the moment.
>> But do they I mean do how much do they
care when they have their issue that
they are going for because they believe
it's important to the base. So there is
a pro-life base that base matters. So my
my argument purely politically would be
obviously do the right thing period
[laughter]
always is my my encouragement. But from
a political standpoint if they want to
rally the base I would say you need to
take bold decisive action. That's what
the base wants to see. They're seeing it
on other issues different parts of bases
you know whether it's ICE and how
they're handling the ICE situation.
>> They're they are handling the ICE
situation in a way that seems unpopular.
>> I I have my gripes with it. Right. A lot
of people do. But they're still doggedly
going the route that they choose to go.
>> Good. So, let's But why do you think
that is? Because it seems like Okay, so
there's a pro-life there's a basic
pro-life problem of how do you persuade
the moderate, the uncertain, the
lukewarm person, but then it seems like
what you're describing is a concrete
internal Republican coalition problem.
And this is not a new thing. I should
stress, by the way. For a long time,
pro-life activists have said, "Okay,
maybe our issue, you know, is is, you
know, doesn't poll incredibly well, but
neither do tax cuts for the rich, and
the Republican party is happy to, you
know, more comfortable passing tax cuts
for the rich than protecting the
unborn." So this is not a new issue, but
it does seem like there is this sort of
energy inside the Trump White House
where it's like we have to take these
steps on immigration and we don't care
how they poll. Why is abortion
different?
>> Well, they've made some strides on
abortion. So we have seen some decisive
actions and you know the pardoning of
the pro-life prisoners last year. Just
[clears throat] to clarif
who are arrested and
>> put in prison, including grandmothers
and mothers of I mean, I know some of
them personally. They're really
beautiful, I would say, sacrificial
people. But um but you know, there was
the uh budget last year that President
Trump signed which defunded Planned
Parenthood of Medicaid money for one
year. That was a big deal. I remember
being told two decades ago or 15 years
ago, I don't remember, when I was first
on Capitol Hill as an activist, it's
never going to happen. They're never
going to defund Planned Parenthood. The
Republicans love them. Everyone loves
them. It was, you know, it's good luck
with that. Things seem impossible until
it's done. They're done. [laughter]
And I think on the life issue, we have
seen big strides. Roie Wade was
overruled. People said told me for years
that was going to be impossible. Will we
remove the abortion pill from the
market? It doesn't belong on the market.
It kills human beings. That's what it's
designed to do. It doesn't belong on the
market. So, I think it is a matter of
time. I think, you know, the
administration,
yes, has been slow to move on some
issues and I've, you know, been the
first to say, move, please move faster,
take a stand here. But
>> I guess I'm I'm interested though in the
extent to which it's not just about sort
of the administration itself, but also
about the kind of conservative coalition
it's leading, right? um you know you
have not been making religious arguments
for abortion but it is again excuse me
we have not been definitely haven't been
making religious arguments for abortion
but you haven't you haven't been making
>> those are the worst
>> but you haven't been making explicitly
religious arguments against abortion but
it is no secret we're here on the campus
of a Catholic university that opposition
to abortion is very often linked to
religious faith America as a whole but
even American conservatism has become
less religious
more secular as sort of gender
polarization has increased, conservatism
has become more sort of malecoded. And I
I mean I think one interesting thing
that um people who are pro-choice don't
always realize is that a lot of
especially early pro-life activism was
very female dominated. Right. You're not
in fact you're an exceptional figure but
not an exceptional figure. Right. In
that in that
>> I feel a daughter of those figures like
Nelly Gray, Helen Alvare, others. Yes.
>> Yeah. So in in that sense though,
there's a way in which a kind of secular
maledominated
conservatism
maybe is just inherently less interested
in the pro-life cause. Do you think
that's a possibility? And if so, what
what does the pro-life movement do about
that sort of changing reality of the
conservative coalition?
>> That's an interesting read. I actually
haven't I I I don't know that I agree
with the read that it's the fact that
it's maledominated that makes it
>> I'm speculating.
>> Yeah. I I think there's plenty of
squishy there have been squishy
politicians who are women on life you
know so on both sides quite frankly and
certainly on the Democrat side
unfortunately that they're very locked
in on support of abortion which is
tragic by the way
>> right and there are many you know
obviously very very pro-life men I just
think of it as like I you know I'm I go
on the internet right like I'm familiar
with what Gen Z right-wingers on social
media are talking about right and it is
immigration civilizational battles
argument uments about Israel, race,
racism, these kind of things like these
are this is this is sort of the zone of
debate and abortion doesn't seem central
to that. Just as an observer,
>> I mean I I would have a slightly
different view for better and for worse
and that so I do think there's an
identity crisis happening on the right.
I agree with you on that. there's this
internal their internal uh fra factions
are forming about what are we going to
be what do we support that and and I'm
sure there's been variations of that on
the left too so it kind of is a problem
here ongoing and if and that's where if
you don't have ideological consistency
if you don't have truth you're going to
end up fraying at the seams it's just
not going to it's going to fall apart
eventually there needs to be a
foundation of truth and the truth of the
pro-life cause is so foundational to any
civilization human life has value human
beings have a right to life human humans
are worth protecting. Children are worth
protecting. But I think on the right,
yes, there's a lot of shiny objects, a
lot of new crises that hit, and a lot of
things to get passionate about. I do
think there is a very strong pro-life
core in the administration. There's a
lot of strong pro-life people who are
there who are like, you know, Mr. Trump,
please, like, let's let's get all this
stuff done, right? And President Trump
has all of his other objectives and the
things he's working on. He's let some
things pass, which is wonderful. We we
celebrate that. We obviously need to see
more. I don't think it's a matter of
there's not people who care enough. I
think a lot of people care. I do think
it is a matter though of prioritization
and there are competing interests and
that's where again I'm here in DC live
actions working and many other prolife
groups because the children in the womb
they don't have a voice. But I think
that's an opportunity. I think that's an
opportunity for really forming a
resolute spiritual identity of we're not
in this just for ourselves. We're
thinking about other people. We are
caring about the future future
generations we may never meet. And I
would say that's not just a spiritual
identity that the Republican party
should have. I would hope the Democrat
party could find that identity too. They
used to have it by the way. The
Democrats used to be pro-life.
>> That that was a flip in the last several
decades as well. So I think we it's
going to take a pendulum shift.
Certainly it's going to take activism,
advocacy, education, but I do think that
shift can can and will happen.
>> On that idealistic argument, that's an
argument it's very hard for me to
imagine the current president of the
United States making in those terms.
>> Himself himself. Himself. I mean, basic
question. Do you think Donald Trump is
pro-life? I think he's told me he's told
me himself that he supports some
abortions and um you know, but he's also
said he is pro-life. So, I think he has
a desire to be seen and to do good
things for the country. And I think that
some of the things that he has helped
accomplish have been very good. So my
hope for someone like Donald Trump is
that President Trump is that as he's
surrounded by people who are encouraging
him to do the good thing and showing him
the data and you know telling him the
base wants this. I think those are all
he's a very political obviously leader.
It's going to help him with his
decision-m I think we can see future
pro-life decisions out of President
Trump. I do. I mean I've been
disappointed. I've been critical. I've
gotten in trouble you know certainly. Um
>> No, you were I mean you were you were
very critical during the campaign,
right? during the 2024 campaign when he
was already distancing himself from the
pro-life cauc.
And so I mean he used to be a
pro-abortion liberal.
>> He used I mean he and that's not some
secret you know he that this is clear.
So the the the the President Trump has
changed on issues. That's a fact.
Everyone knows that. Do you think that
he is talking about persuasion
and talking about the idea that
ultimately for the pro-life cause to
triumph, it can't be a Republican issue,
right? It has to be an issue that brings
people together across party lines.
Isn't that hard to do as long as a
figure as polarizing as Donald Trump is
seen as the primary spokesman for your
cause? Well, I I don't think he's the
primary spokesman for our cause. I think
he has spoken for the cause, but he's
also said things that the cause has been
very upset about, you know, so there
there's kind of this tension there that
everyone, I think, can see. Um, but I
think that there is, I think, a
narrative, a painting of the brush to
say Donald Trump speaks for all
proiffers or President Trump speaks for
all whatever cause or advocacy group
that he may align with, at least to some
degree. I don't think that's fair. Um,
>> I don't think that's fair. But I think I
think there's I guess I'd put it this
way. I think there's an entanglement
that always happens in politics between
the persona of
>> the president like is a dominant figure
in conservatism today um or the right
today, maybe we don't want to say in
conservatism. I'm not sure. I think it's
fair to say if you were sketching the
ideal spokesman for the kind of
idealistic
cause that you're describing, it
probably wouldn't look like Donald
Trump. How do you imagine the pro-life
movement escaping being just a
conservative cause, just a Republican
cause, just a partisan cause? Like what
role can politics play in getting you
beyond politics? I guess
>> it's a yeah it's a very important
question you're asking and one that
we're always wrestling with because and
and that's why I consider my work
culture first politics second. What's
happening is you have you know thousands
of pregnancy resource centers across the
country and campus movements of hundreds
and hundreds of uh pro-life student
chapters on college campuses. You have
this movement among churches where
people are coming back to the pews and
there's u higher mass attendance where
as Catholics here we talk about mass
higher mass attendance at on among the
cohort of genzers in college. So these
are the things that sometimes you know
>> this is I should note those statistics
are hotly debated and we because I just
I just did a podcast episode that is you
know available on YouTube that you know
in contains a long debate about that. I
>> on the mass attendance question
>> on church attendance and Gen Z and
everything. I just just I just want to
stipulate that. But I um
>> what I but just just to actually to ask
a question not rather than just make a
comment about other podcast episodes.
Does that is that talk but is it was a
wonderful they're all good episodes. I
love them all equally. The on on that
you mentioned crisis pregnancy centers
and so on. Is there a world where public
support for women pregnant women
families with children and so on. Is
there a world where that becomes a
successful form of pro-life outreach?
Yes. Where you say go ahead.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Sorry. Yeah. I I believe it
already is. And and that's the thing.
It's not something that is necessarily
picked up by the New York Times,
although here we are talking about it in
interesting times. But, you know, the
pregnancy care center movement and the
lives of the heroes and the and the
amazing women choosing life, right?
Those sorts of stories, those sorts of
movements that are really, I would say,
long-term movements that are very much
really underground. you don't really see
them necessarily, but that's what I see
every day. Not just as an activist, but
as a as an educator and an advocate.
>> But can politics and policy, I'm saying,
play a role in elevating that? Like you
don't you don't like right now, you
would not expect a Republican candidate
for president to say the central plank
of my platform is going to be
government, more government funding and
support for people working to help women
in crisis pregnancies and people with
young kids who need help. Do you think
if it were, it would be a stronger
argument for the wavering, the
uncertain, the person caught between the
pro-choice and pro-life side?
>> Yes, I absolutely do. I think making
America a more welcoming place to have a
family and raise a family is the winning
message for any party, but certainly for
the Republicans. And and you see that
happening with the administration.
They're picking that up. I mean, the
child tax credit, Trump accounts, um,
conversations about, you know, how to
>> The Trump accounts though aren't
available when when you're having the
baby, right? Like these are long-term
wealth building.
>> You've got you've got to do it every
year for 18 years or whatever the
whatever the the the span is. But, um,
but yeah, I see what you're saying.
Meaning they're not giving a chunk of
cash right when baby is born. And that
would be profoundly helpful for a lot of
people. Uh, and I think that's where I I
I support um tax credits certainly, but
I think there should be cash, direct
cash given to parents. That's what I
think. I think that there should I think
that birth should be free here.
>> [snorts]
>> might sound a little bit uh not like
your typical Republican, but you see
this sort of language now happening more
on the right where if we're going to be
spending public, we're going to be
spending taxpayer funds. It should go to
what is really an existential crisis
that we're facing, which is our
plummeting birth rates. You want to talk
about it from the, you know, 100,000
foot view. And we want to make America
healthier for families and better for
parents. So I think public policy that
does focus on that and and yeah uses
taxpayer money. I think that that's a a
wonderful thing and I do see that
happening more on the right. People are
talking like this.
>> Yes. I
>> I mean I remember when I
>> on the internet. Yes. On the internet.
So in Congress I mean Vice President you
know JD Vance in his speech at the March
for Life today was talking about making
America a more welcoming place to raise
a family. Talking about obviously the
Trump accounts, child tax credits. Uh we
want to make you know birth easier to
have children. So the language is
happening.
>> Yes,
>> the policy is going to catch up more and
that's where we have to get concrete.
But I do see that more on the right than
I've ever seen before in my in my
lifetime.
>> All right, let's let's touch on one more
concrete form of outreach that loops
back to something we were talking about
earlier, which is the idea of compromise
and middle ground, right? Um I think one
of the things that has been most notable
about the way um the abortion debate has
played out since dos has been the focus
on difficult pregnancies pregnancies
where the woman's health is threatened
in some way where there's an issue with
the pregnancy where there's a potential
miscarriage and so on and where there is
a what what I would describe as a kind
of zone of uncertainty about when
exceptions for saving the life of the
mother kick in when doctors are allowed
to perform abortions and so on. Earlier
you talked about essentially the idea
that you know you should be allowed to
perform an abortion under ectopic
pregnancy conditions. Um but basically
that's about it that there isn't really
any other circumstance where a pregnancy
should be treated as life-threatening to
the mother and aborted. that is a very
very unpopular position. [snorts]
Um and it's also a position I think that
from my perspective sort of again I
think underplays the deep uncertainty
that obtains in situations where health
and life are sort of in different ways
in the balance. Um, is there any room
for effectively saying, look, if we are
going to restrict abortion, we need to
recognize that there has to be a certain
kind of latitude for doctors in these
circumstances.
>> Well, first of all, it's important to
note that the exceptions, the rare cases
for life-threatening emergencies that
they're coded that way anyways or rape
or incest are less than 3%, maybe even
less than 1%. So I think that's also
just important ground to set that this
has always been used in the political
context and the media context as this is
why we need abortion and then you get a
million abortions a year and it's
>> absolutely but it's been but it's been
used because it is politically effective
right because people are aware of you
know the the inherent uncertainty that
hangs over certain medical situations
during pregnancy I'm just curious can
the pro-life movement basically say look
in those situations ions. We don't know
exactly which abortions count as saving
the life of the mother or not, but for
the sake of a larger ban, we are willing
to accept that doctors are going to make
decisions that we're not going to second
guess.
>> So, I think it is in the training of the
doctor. When a doctor is committed to
both lives and is not secretly I want to
support abortion liberalization because
that's my agenda that I have. I think
it's a lot easier for a doctor to
operate. I think what we've seen in many
of these cases that you're referencing
and we could get specific about one if
you'd like in these cases, there's a
thousand different factors. There's a
lot of different factors, right? And it
is very easy to politicize these cases.
And that's what has happened again and
again and again. They've been become
politicized to say, well, in this case,
this woman wasn't given care because of
the pro-life law. But you start to
investigate, and we do this all the time
at Live Action News. We work with
medical professionals who provide uh
their expert opinion. There's a PLOG
which is a pro-life group of
obstitricians gynecologists. There's the
Dublin declaration over a thousand
medical professionals who say abortion
the direct and intentional killing is
the definition there of the child is not
medically necessary. We can care for
both. there's ways to care for both.
That really, I think, hasn't really
reached enough people that that is that
that there's
>> but in the meantime, you have laws and
you have hospitals that have not been
trained in these practices or doctors
who disagree with those arguments,
right? Who and who are in the position
of basically saying,
>> "We're in states that ban abortion.
There are life of the mother exceptions.
We're not sure what those cover." So
you'll see this hospitals will say,
"Well, we're not going to we're going to
wait and see and not perform an
abortion, right?" And then that yields
stories of medical difficulty that I
think some of them some of them are
blown out of proportion, but some of
them are legitimate. And it seems like
your argument would be in those
circumstances, the hospitals are
basically just doing the right thing by
waiting. But that that again seems to me
to be
>> what I would also say is there's no
investigative energy behind all of the
cases where abortions may have been
performed and there were also bad
outcomes for mom and baby. Um certainly
for the baby. The baby's dead. There's
always the worst outcome for the baby.
And there's no energy behind that
investigative report. I mean maternal
mortality rates in America are
atrocious. They're atrocious. And that's
not because of pro-life laws. That's
because of our health care system. But
the bottom line is this.
you abortion is not medically necessary
and this is not my opinion. This is the
position of thousands of medical
professionals. There are thousands of
doctors today who are doing amazing work
caring for both mom and baby. And
abortion and early delivery of a baby
where you're not directly killing the
baby, you're delivering the baby. The
baby might pass away because the baby's
too small for NICU. Obviously, that
would be a tragedy. That would be a very
rare uh case. If you get the right care,
good care, the care you deserve for a
high-risisk pregnancy, they the odds are
very good that you can save you and the
baby. And if the baby has a disability,
this is also used as a medical
justification for abortion. Oh, it's
medically necessary because the baby's
going to die. Well, if you have a a a
view in healthcare that instead of we
kill a dying patient, you know, expedite
the death, get the baby to die more
before it naturally dies because the
baby's sick or the baby has a
disability. If you instead allow if
there is a natural death that may take
place, instead of taking the life, you
allow the natural death to take place,
you provide hospice care or paliative
care for the for the child or many times
a child does survive. There's so many
cases where uh parents were told your
baby's gonna die and the baby survives,
your baby's gonna have a severe
disability, the baby's much better than
they than they believed the baby to be.
Right?
>> So the point here is there is a pro-life
healthcare system that is within reach.
It's been done before,
>> but it requires but that argument again,
I guess, brings us back to questions of
persuasion and mindset, right? that
you're talking about a world where
medical professionals and the medical
system at large themselves have just a
very different
>> just a very different basic and
fundamental attitude, right? and and
also where you know it is true as you
say that um you know diagnoses are wrong
and children survive and so on but it is
also the case that that is a world that
sort of would accept to a greater degree
than our system does sort of
>> disability and sort of you know
[clears throat] that that is that is
also part of the story here right and I
don't want to go too far with that I
just want to pull us back here at the
end to you know the ar the kind of
argument that that you make and we you
know I sort of asked you to walk through
in a kind of you know almost like
forensic debater's way right the case
around abortion um but the reality is
that obviously this is an incredibly
personal issue that is connected to
people's experiences their bodily
experiences their experience of having
kids not having kids all the rest of it
and it is in the end a female issue in a
profound way I think that no man can
quite fully understand. And I gestured
at this a little talking about the
Republican party, right? But it is the
case. It is this situation right now
where the Republican party, which is the
pro-life party, is a more male party,
less female party. There is increasing
political polarization of the sexes,
right? And so the pro-life movement is
in a position increasingly of speaking
from within a more male coalition to a
female population that for Trump
specific reasons and other reasons is
alienated from that coalition. So I just
wanted to end by asking you if you're
having a personal discussion about why
women should be pro-life,
what kinds of things do you say?
I think that we as women are we our
superpower, the thing that makes us
different from men of course is the
ability to mother and there has been so
much I think rejection of motherhood as
somehow giving us a lower status over
the last few decades. I know when I was
growing up the girl boss era was in full
swing. It's kind of dying down a little
bit right now because people are
realizing maybe that's not my endgame is
is girl bossing so hard. Um but and by
the way I I girl boss so I'm not saying
girl boss is bad. I love
>> I wasn't going to say it but since you
said it
>> I love it. I mean girl boss and that use
your talents to the fullest extent you
can you know for the good of others. I
hope right is the is the goal. Um but
also embrace marriage motherhood and
yeah there's going to be seasons where
you work you have to pull back. I travel
far less than I did when I didn't have
my young children. But um but I think
that there needs to be for women a
better vision for ourselves because I
think that's part and and I would say
this is true for men existentially too
to some degree in our culture. There's
this I think we're very tired. We're at
war with each other. We have been for
some time the sexes and we've lost a
sense of identity about what a woman
even is. And you can make a joke about
this of course with the transgender
issue and you know confusion around
biological womanhood but what does it
mean to be a woman? And I would say the
most unique thing about a woman versus a
man is that ability uniquely in its own
womanly way versus the this masculine
way to bring life into the world. And
that's not always going to be biological
because not every woman is called to
biological motherhood. But I think a
mature woman ultimately is going to be
called to some sort of emotional or
spiritual mothering of others. Same for
a man, a fathering of others. So I think
presenting that vision where women are
not at war with their ability to bring
life into the world biologically. We're
not at war with men. We we re-mbbrace
marriage as a good thing. Uh we are not
at war with our talents that maybe exist
outside of our marriage and our kids
that we could also use and develop. Of
of course that's going to um have
different seasons in how we do that. I
think that's a that's a more honest look
at what what women are designed for,
what we can become. And I think we're
tired otherwise. And if someone say if
if your interlocutor says
>> that's inspiring and I believe in that
but I or a woman I know are in a
position where motherhood is being is
sort of feels like it's being imposed
under impossible circumstances which is
again I think where a certain kind of
pro-choice sentiment starts where it's
just seems impossible. Last thing what
do you what do you say in that
circumstance? I get I get messages on
Instagram almost daily about that. And
with each case, we talk to her. We
connect her to resources in her
community that will help her and empower
her, not just to give birth and have a
healthy pregnancy, but if she chooses to
to mother and sometimes that's the hard
path for some women of choosing to
mother alone because there's a child
support guy in the picture she doesn't
want to be with. And that is a
challenging path. But there are so many
heroes that I know of women who have
overcome the greatest challenges and
have fought for their children and have
accomplished incredible things. So I
would say there are resources. There are
people that want to help you. So if
you're in that situation where you're
feeling, oh, I I need to have abortion.
First of all, you're not in a position
of empowerment to say feel like you need
to have an abortion, right? Abortion was
supposed to be choice empowerment. The
reality is people feel like, oh, I
really need this. I'm really hurting.
I'm struggling. Well, there are people
that want to help you. And we are I'm
excited at liveaction.org. There's a
resource page. We have a whole suite of
organizations we work with. There
[snorts] are people that want to help
you. And we're not meant to do this
alone. No woman is meant to do this
alone. And people want to help you.
>> And what do you get if you do it?
>> I mean, a lifetime of love, a new human
being. There's nothing greater than love
and loving other human beings and being
loved by them. And the the joy of a new
human life even in challenging
circumstances. again talking about some
of these people that I've had the
privilege of learning their stories and
playing a very small role in helping
them.
There's nothing to there's no more peak
life experience I would say this side of
heaven than embracing a new human life
and having the privilege of providing
some nurture and helping them grow.
>> Laya Rose, thank you for joining me.
>> Thank you. Thank you so much. [applause]
>> [music]
[music]